Quick note: Anything encased in [ ] means that it’s optional. Some commands can be used without options or specifying files.

Options:  
Over time, frequently-used options in well-known Unix programs have established a loose sort of semantic standard for what various flags might be expected to mean. The following is a list of options and meanings that should prove usefully unsurprising to an experienced Unix user:  

-a  
All (without argument). If there is a GNU-style --all option, for -a to be anything but a synonym for it would be quite surprising. Examples: fuser(1), fetchmail(1).  
Append, as in tar(1). This is often paired with -d for delete.  

-b  
Buffer or block size (with argument). Set a critical buffer size, or (in a program having to do with archiving or managing storage media) set a block size.  
Batch. If the program is naturally interactive, -b may be used to suppress prompts or set other options appropriate to accepting input from a file rather than a human operator. Example: flex(1).  

-c  
Command (with argument). If the program is an interpreter that normally takes commands from standard input, it is expected that the option of a -c argument will be passed to it as a single line of input. This convention is particularly strong for shells and shell-like interpreters. Compare -e below.  
Check (without argument). Check the correctness of the file argument(s) to the command, but don't actually perform normal processing. Frequently used as a syntax-check option by programs that do interpretation of command files.  

-d  
Debug (with or without argument). Set the level of debugging messages. This one is very common.  
Occasionally -d has the sense of ‘delete’ or ‘directory’.  

-D  
Define (with argument). Set the value of some symbol in an interpreter, compiler, or (especially) macro-processor-like application. The model is the use of -D by the C compiler's macro preprocessor. This is a strong association for most Unix programmers; don't try to fight it.  

-e  
Execute (with argument). Programs that are wrappers, or that can be used as wrappers, often allow -e to set the program they hand off control to.  
Edit. A program that can open a resource in either a read-only or editable mode may allow -e to specify opening in the editable mode. Examples: crontab(1), and the get(1) utility of the SCCS version-control system.  
Occasionally -e has the sense of ‘exclude’ or ‘expression’.  

-f  
File (with argument). Very often used with an argument to specify an input (or, less frequently, output) file for programs that need to randomly access their input or output (so that redirection via < or > won't suffice).  
It is also used to indicate that arguments normally taken from the command line should be taken from a file instead; see awk(1) and egrep(1) for classic examples. Compare -o below; often, -f is the input-side analog of -o.  
Force (typically without argument). Force some operation (such as a file lock or unlock) that is normally performed conditionally. This is less common.  
Daemons often use -f in a way that combines these two meanings, to force processing of a configuration file from a nondefault location. Examples: ssh(1), httpd(1), and many other daemons.  

-h  
Headers (typically without argument). Enable, suppress, or modify headers on a tabular report generated by the program. Examples: pr(1), ps(1).  
Help. This is actually less common than one might expect offhand — for much of Unix's early history developers tended to think of on-line help as memory-footprint overhead they couldn't afford. Instead they wrote manual pages.  

-i  
Initialize (usually without argument). Set some critical resource or database associated with the program to an initial or empty state.  
Interactive (usually without argument). Force a program that does not normally query for confirmation to do so.  

-I  
Include (with argument). Add a file or directory name to those searched for resources by the application. All Unix compilers with any equivalent of source-file inclusion in their languages use -I in this sense. It would be extremely surprising to see this option letter used in any other way.  

-k  
Keep (without argument). Suppress the normal deletion of some file, message, or resource.  
Occasionally -k has the sense of ‘kill’.  

-l  
List (without argument). If the program is an archiver or interpreter/player for some kind of directory or archive format, it would be quite surprising for -l to do anything but request an item listing.  
In programs that are already report generators, -l almost invariably means “long” and triggers some kind of long-format display revealing more detail than the default mode.  
Load (with argument). If the program is a linker or a language interpreter, -l invariably loads a library, in some appropriate sense.  
Login. In programs such as rlogin(1) and ssh(1) that need to specify a network identity, -l is how you do it.  
Occasionally -l has the sense of ‘length’ or ‘lock’.  

-m  
Message (with argument). Used with an argument, -m passes it in as a message string for some logging or announcement purpose.  
Occasionally -m has the sense of ‘mail’, ‘mode’, or ‘modification-time’.  

-n  
Number (with argument). Used, for example, for page number ranges in programs such as head(1), tail(1), nroff(1), and troff(1). Some networking tools that normally display DNS names accept -n as an option that causes them to display the raw IP addresses instead.  
Not (without argument). Used to suppress normal actions in programs such as make(1).  

-o  
Output (with argument). When a program needs to specify an output file or device by name on the command line, the -o option does it. Examples: as(1), cc(1), sort(1). On anything with a compiler-like interface, it would be extremely surprising to see this option used in any other way.  
Programs that support -o often (like gcc) have logic that allows it to be recognized after ordinary arguments as well as before.  

-p  
Port (with argument). Especially used for options that specify TCP/IP port numbers.  
Protocol (with argument).  

-q  
Quiet (usually without argument). Suppress normal result or diagnostic output. See also the ‘silent’ sense of -s.  

-r (also -R)  
Recurse (without argument). If the program operates on a directory, then this option might tell it to recurse on all subdirectories. Any other use in a utility that operated on directories would be quite surprising.  
Reverse (without argument). A filter might use this to reverse its normal translation action (compare -d).  

-s  
Silent (without argument). Suppress normal diagnostic or result output (similar to -q; when both are supported, q means ‘quiet’ but -s means ‘utterly silent’).  
Subject (with argument). Always used with this meaning on commands that send or manipulate mail or news messages. It is extremely important to support this, as programs that send mail expect it.  
Occasionally -s has the sense of ‘size’.  

-t  
Tag (with argument). Name a location or give a string for a program to use as a retrieval key. Especially used with text editors and viewers.  

-u  
User (with argument). Specify a user, by name or numeric UID.  

-v  
Verbose (with or without argument). Used to enable transaction-monitoring, more voluminous listings, or debugging output.  
Version (without argument). Display program's version on standard output and exit. Examples: cvs(1), chattr(1), patch(1), uucp(1). More usually this action is invoked by -V.  

-V  
Version (without argument). Display program's version on standard output and exit (often also prints compiled-in configuration details as well). It would be quite surprising for this switch to be used in any other way.  

-w  
Width (with argument). Especially used for specifying widths in output formats.  
Warning (without argument). Enable warning diagnostics, or suppress them.  

-x  
Enable debugging (with or without argument).  
Extract (with argument). List files to be extracted from an archive or working set.  

-y  
Yes (without argument). Authorize potentially destructive actions for which the program would normally require confirmation.  

-z  
Enable compression (without argument). Archiving and backup programs often use this.  

The preceding examples are taken from the Linux toolset, but should be good on most modern Unixes.
- ls — List directory contents  
ls is probably the most common command. A lot of times, you’ll be working in a directory and you’ll need to know what files are located there.  
The ls command allows you to quickly view all files within the specified directory.  
Syntax: ls [option(s)] [file(s)]  
Common options: -a, -l  

- echo — Prints text to the terminal window  
echo prints text to the terminal window and is typically used in shell scripts and batch files to output status text to the screen or a computer file.  
Echo is also particularly useful for showing the values of environmental variables, which tell the shell how to behave as a user works at the command line or in scripts.  
Syntax: echo [option(s)] [string(s)]  
Common options: -e, -n  

- touch — Creates a file  
touch is going to be the easiest way to create new files, but it can also be used to change timestamps on files and/or directories.  
You can create as many files as you want in a single command without worrying about overwriting files with the same name.  
Syntax: touch [option(s)] file_name(s)  
Common options: -a, -m, -r, -d  

- mkdir — Create a directory  
mkdir is a useful command you can use to create directories. Any number of directories can be created simultaneously which can greatly speed up the process.  
Syntax: mkdir [option(s)] directory_name(s)  
Common options: -m, -p, -v  

- grep — search  
grep is used to search text for patterns specified by the user. It is one of the most useful and powerful commands.  
There are often scenarios where you’ll be tasked to find a particular string or pattern within a file, but you don’t know where to start looking, that is where grep is extremely useful.  
Syntax: grep [option(s)] pattern [file(s)]  
Common options: -i, -c, -n  

man — Print manual or get help for a command  
The man command is your manual and is very useful when you need to figure out what a command does.  
For example, if you didn’t know what the command rmdir does, you could use the man command to find that out.  
Syntax: man [option(s)] keyword(s)  
Common options: -w, -f, -b  

- pwd — Print working directory  
pwd is used to print the current directory you’re in. As an example, if you have multiple terminals going and you need to remember the exact directory you’re working within, then pwd will tell you.  
Syntax: pwd [option(s)]  
Common options: options aren’t typically used with pwd  

- cd — Change directory  
cd will change the directory you’re in so that you can get info, manipulate, read, etc. the different files and directories in your system.  
Syntax: cd [option(s)] directory  
Common options: options aren’t typically used with cd  

- mv — Move or rename directory  

mv is used to move or rename directories. Without this command, you would have to individually rename each file which is tedious.  
mv allows you to do batch file renaming which can save you loads of time.  
Syntax: mv [option(s)] argument(s)  
Common options: -i, -b  

- rmdir — Remove directory  
rmdir will remove empty directories. This can help clean up space on your computer and keep files and folders organized.  
It’s important to note that there are two ways to remove directories: rm and rmdir.  
The distinction between the two is that rmdir will only delete empty directories, whereas rm will remove directories and files regardless if they contain data or not.  
Syntax: rmdir [option(s)] directory_names  
Common options: -p  

- locate — Locate a specific file or directory  
This is by far the simplest way to find a file or directory. You can keep your search broad if you don’t know what exactly it is you’re looking for, or you can narrow the scope by using wildcards or regular expressions.  
Syntax: locate [option(s)] file_name(s)  
Common options: -q, -n, -i  

- less — view the contents of a text file  
The less command allows you to view files without opening an editor. It’s faster to use, and there’s no chance of you inadvertently modifying the file.  
Syntax: less file_name  
Common options: -e, -f, -n  

- compgen — Shows all available commands, aliases, and functions  
compgen is a handy command when you need to reference all available commands, aliases, and functions.  
Syntax: compgen [option(s)]  
Common options: -a, -c, -d  

- > — redirect stdout  
The > character is the redirect operator. This takes the output from the preceding command that you’d normally see in the terminal and sends it to a file that you give it.  
As an example, take echo “contents of file1” > file1. Here it creates a file called file1 and puts the echoed string into it.  
Syntax: >  
Common options: n/a  

- cat — Read a file, create a file, and concatenate files  
cat is one of the more versatile commands and serves three main functions: displaying them, combining copies of them, and creating new ones.  
Syntax: cat [option(s)] [file_name(s)] [-] [file_name(s)]  
Common options: -n  

- | — Pipe  
A pipe takes the standard output of one command and passes it as the input to another.  
Syntax: |  
Common options: n/a  

- head — Read the start of a file  
By default, the head command displays the first 10 lines of a file. There are times when you may need to quickly look at a few lines in a file and head allows you to do that.  
A typical example of when you’d want to use head is when you need to analyze logs or text files that change frequently.  
Syntax: head [option(s)] file(s)  
Common options: -n  

- tail — Read the end of a file  
By default, the tail command displays the last 10 lines of a file. There are times when you may need to quickly look at a few lines in a file and tail allows you to do that.  
A typical example of when you’d want to use tail is when you need to analyze logs or text files that change frequently.  
Syntax: tail [option(s)] file_names  
Common options: -n  

- chmod — Sets the file permissions flag on a file or folder  
There are situations that you’ll come across where you or a colleague will try to upload a file or modify a document and you receive an error because you don’t have access.  
The quick fix for this is to use chmod. Permissions can be set with either alphanumeric characters (u, g, o) and can be assigned their access with w, r, x.  
Conversely, you can also use octal numbers (0-7) to change the permissions. For example, chmod 777 my_file will give access to everyone.  
Syntax: chmod [option(s)] permissions file_name  
Common options: -f, -v  

- exit — Exit out of a directory  
The exit command will close a terminal window, end the execution of a shell script, or log you out of an SSH remote access session.  
Syntax: exit  
Common options: n/a  

Master the Bash Shell


history — list your most recent commands

An important command when you need to quickly identify past commands that you’ve used.

Syntax: history

Common options: -c, -d

clear — Clear your terminal window

This command is used to clear all previous commands and output from consoles and terminal windows. This keeps your terminal clean and removes the clutter so you can focus on subsequent commands and their output.

Syntax: clear

Common options: n/a

cp — copy files and directories

Use this command when you need to back up your files.

Syntax: cp [option(s)] current_name new_name

Common options: -r, -i, -b

kill — terminate stalled processes

The kill command allows you to terminate a process from the command line. You do this by providing the process ID (PID) of the process to kill. To find the PID, you can use the ps command accompanied by options -aux.

Syntax: kill [signal or option(s)] PID(s)

Common options: -p

sleep — delay a process for a specified amount of time

sleep is a common command for controlling jobs and is mainly used in shell scripts. You’ll notice in the syntax that there is a suffix; the suffix is used to specify the unit of time whether it be s (seconds), m (minutes), or d (days). The default unit of time is seconds unless specified.

Syntax: sleep number [suffix]

Common options: n/a
